\newpage

## Assessments 

**Map Project** (50%)

This assessment is designed to give you a chance to demonstrate your ability to effectively use QGIS to prepare map layers, produce exported maps for incorporation into a historical project; be able to articulate what the maps can be useful for; and be able to describe the limitations and problems associated with your map and the data on which it depends. For Submission you must upload, as a zipped collection of files, to the MMS:

* 1,500 word explanatory essay which provides some basic historical background to the inspiration for the map project, discusses the ways in which the map can be used for heuristic, illustrative, or analytical purposes, and the limitations and problems with map. In other words, discuss both what the map might reveal, but also what it may potentially conceal or distort. *Important*: At the end of the essay or embedded into the body of the essay should be the exported maps, with any post-processing required, such as you would want them to appear in a historical essay, with an appropriate caption. You will be marked in part on the presentation quality of the map and its ability to clearly and cleanly communicate what it sets out to show.
* An appendix, at least 500 words must also be uploaded to the MMS which describes the technical process by which you assembled the QGIS project and its layers. What did you do to create each of the layers? Where exactly did you get the data for each of the layers and why did you choose that data over possible alternatives? What other technical steps did you carry out in order to produce the project?
* If your files cannot, for some reason be uploaded directly to MMS as a zip file, you may instead upload a single page document with a link to a place where the QGIS files can be downloaded (publicly accessible or shared Google Drive or Dropbox file link, or other file sharing resource). If you choose to use this method, in order to ensure that no further modifications to the documents are made after submission, your document with the link must include the "checksum" or MD5 hash for the zipped collection of documents (you can do this via the command line or online at a site such as this one: http://onlinemd5.com/). Alternatively, you may submit a USB drive on the previous meeting of class with the files. 

**Scope**: The number of layers of data, the number of visualisations produced, and the quantity of data to include depends entirely on what map or maps are being created, that is what you are trying to show. It may consist of three or up to a dozen layers and may include natural coastal or topographical data, other features, and thematic data layers visualizing things. You may generate a single exported map if it is rich and complex (but not to the detriment of its ability to communicate), requiring a very significant amount of time in preparation or a collection of different maps using different data or snapshots of data at a particular time if they can be used effectively for historical argumentation. You may combine maps with tables or graphs, or maps combined with presentation of spatial analysis. Think of your project as building a portfolio to pitch your work at a workshop, in a grant application, etc. showing a good balance of analysis, design skills, and judicious of choice in what to include and exclude. If you are concerned about finding the balance, feel free to consult with the tutor as your potential outputs become clearer.

*Considerations for Assessment:*

* Context: Did the project explanatory essay set the context sufficiently?
* Analysis: Did the project explanatory essay effectively explore the limitations and advantages of the maps produced or spatial analysis performed?
* Combination: Did the chosen combination of a) the number of maps produced b) the challenge of compiling the spatial data for visualisation c) the challenge of specific techniques employed in the creation of the visualisations d) the employment of any specific spatial analysis e) any alternative ways of visualising the data (tables, graphs, as appropriate) represent an effective and judicious balance for the presented project portfolio? 
* Appendix: Did the appendix effectively describe the process of creating the visualisations and any spatial analysis performed and did it properly cite the sources for the data.
* Design: Did any visualisations or maps produced clearly communicate their contents and demonstrate a good sense of design, well-chosen scales, and appropriate density of visual information? 
* Restraint: Did the project avoid superfluous visualisations that contribute little to the overall project and show good judgement in what to include and exclude?

**Final Project** (50%)

The final project is not, as in the map project, limited to a single digital methodology, medium, or approach. In general, it make take the form of one of the three following kinds of project:

1. You may do a project which makes use of one or more of the new computational techniques learned in the second half of the course: text analysis and/or social network visualisation and analysis. You are free to use the combination of tools and techniques that you feel most appropriate and comfortable in using (R, Python, Cytoscape, Gephi, Orange, Voyant Tools, Palladio, Shiny, regular expressions and command line utilities etc.). You are also welcome to teach yourself and make use of other techniques and tools that you have come across if these are well documented and described in your project.
2. You may do another historical GIS project that shows significant progress in the depth of your skills or which combines historical GIS with other techniques learned in the module. I recommend that you use a different source base. If it uses the same source or sources, it must make the clear argument for how this data was used to substantively and considerably develop the project further, showing evolution in terms of its analysis, techniques, and outputs. This may include using the same or similar sources and making use of other techniques of text or network analysis with the sources. Please consult the tutor if you are concerned about overlap.
3. You may, alternatively, write a 4,000 word essay in the genre of the critical humanities. For this alternative, you should engage effectively with the theoretical scholarship on critical digital humanities both generally and specifically for the area of focus for your essay and it must engage critically and effectively with several several pieces of scholarship that may be described as applications of the technologies studied in this module.

Unless you have chosen to do the critical essay, your project should include from one to a dozen visualisations depending on the difficulty and complexity of the visualisations produced and what they can potentially be used for. These may include any of the following: 1) a collection of graphs and tables identifying patterns in the data or the product of computational analysis of text or networks. 2) Visualisation of the data through GIS output in the form of a choropleth or other thematic map, visualisations of networks using Cytoscape, Gephie, Palladio, or other visualisation tool, maps which visualise networks or material extracted from a text or corpus of texts. 3) a list of regular expressions, including description of what they do, that were used to clean data or extract useful material from texts. 

For Submission you must upload to the MMS:

* 1,500 word explanatory essay which provides some basic historical background to the inspiration for the project and visualisations. It must also discuss the limitations, assumptions, and advantages of the material produced, including its heuristic, illustrative, and analytic goals, but also what they may conceal or distort. *Important*: Embedded in the body of the essay or at the end of the essay you should produce the exported visualisations.
* At least 500 word appendix discussing the technical process you used to create the database and visualisation. What decisions did you make in coding the data, where did you get the data from exactly, and what steps did you take in producing the visualisations.
* If your files cannot, for some reason be uploaded directly to MMS as a zip file, you may instead upload a single page document with a link to a place where the QGIS files can be downloaded (publicly accessible or shared Google Drive or Dropbox file link, or other file sharing resource). If you choose to use this method, in order to ensure that no further modifications to the documents are made after submission, your document with the link must include the "checksum" or MD5 hash for the zipped collection of documents (you can do this via the command line or online at a site such as this one: http://onlinemd5.com/). Alternatively, you may submit a USB drive on the previous meeting of class with the files. 

*Considerations for Assessment:*

* Context: Did the project explanatory essay set the context sufficiently?
* Analysis: Did the project explanatory essay effectively explore the limitations and advantages of the visualisation produced or computational analysis performed?
* Combination: Did the chosen combination of a) the number of visualisations etc. produced b) a challenge in compiling the data for visualisation c) the challenge of specific techniques employed in the creation of the visualisations d) the employment of any specific forms of computational analysis of networks, text, or spatial data. Were they an appropriate combination of materials?
* Appendix: Did the appendix effectively describe the process of creating the visualisations and any analysis performed and did it properly cite the sources for the data.
* Design: Did any visualisations or maps produced clearly communicate their contents and demonstrate a good sense of design, well-chosen scales, and appropriate density of visual information? 
* Restraint: Did the project avoid superfluous visualisations that contribute little to the overall project and show good judgement in what to include and exclude?
* Development: If the project used historical GIS and use the same or similar source base, then did the project show a substantive development beyond the first assessment, and make clear in the explanatory essay what that development consisted of.
* Critical Essay: If a critical essay was chosen instead, did the essay engage effectively with an appropriate amount of theoretical literature for its topic? Did it have a clear argument which was well supported throughout the essay? Did it include evaluation of multiple concrete essays making use of computational approaches or quantitative analysis?

